CO3354 Introduction to natural language processing
1.5 Software requirements
This course assumes you have access to the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) either
on your own computer or at your institution. The NLTK can be freely downloaded
and it is strongly recommended that you install it on your own machine: Windows,
Mac OSX and Linux distributions are available from http://nltk.org (last visited
April 10th 2013) and some distributions of Linux have it in their package/software
managers. Full instructions are available at the cited website along with details of
associated packages which should also be installed, including Python itself which is
also freely available. Once you have installed the software you should also download
the required datasets as explained in the textbook (Bird et al., 2009, p. 3).
You should check the NLTK website to determine what versions of Python are
supported. Current stable releases of NLTK are compatible with Python 2.6 and 2.7.
A version supporting Python 3 is under development and may be available for
testing by the time you read this guide (as of April 2013).
1.6 How to use the guide/structure of the course
This section gives a brief summary of each chapter. These learning outcomes are
listed at the beginning of each main chapter and assume that you have worked
through the recommended readings and activities for that chapter.
1.6.1 Chapter 2: Introducing NLP: patterns and structures in language
This chapter looks at different approaches to analysing texts, ranging from ‘shallow’
techniques that focus on individual words and phrases to ‘deeper’ methods that
produce a full representation of the grammatical structure of a sentence as a
hierarchical tree diagram. The chapter introduces two important formalisms:
regular expressions , which will play an important part throughout the course, and
context-free grammars which we return to in Chapter 6 of the subject guide.
1.6.2 Chapter 3: Getting to grips with natural language data
This chapter looks at the different kinds of data resources that can be used for
developing tools to harvest information that has been published as machine-readable
documents. In particular, we introduce the notion of a ‘corpus’ (plural corpora ) – for
the purposes of this course, a computer-readable collection of text or speech. The
NLTK includes a selection of excerpts from several well-known corpora and we
provide brief descriptions of the most important of these and of the different formats
in which corpora are stored.
8 What the course does not cover
1.6.3 Chapter 4: Computational tools for text analysis
The previous chapter introduced some relatively superﬁcial techniques for language
analysis such as concordancing and collocations. This chapter covers some
fundamental operations in text analysis:
tokenisation: breaking up a character string into words, punctuation marks and
other meaningful expressions;
stemming: removing afﬁxes from words, e.g. mean+ing ,distribut+ion ;
tagging: associating each word in a text with a grammatical category or part of
speech.
1.6.4 Chapter 5: Statistically-based techniques for text analysis
Statistical and probabilistic methods are pervasive in modern computational
linguistics. These methods generally do not aim at complete understanding or
analysis of a text, but at producing reliable answers to well-deﬁned problems such as
sentiment analysis, topic detection or recognising named entities and relations
between them in a text.
1.6.5 Chapter 6: Analysing sentences: syntax and parsing
This chapter resumes the discussion of natural language syntax that was introduced
in Chapter 2, concentrating on context-free grammar formalisms and various ways
they need to be modiﬁed and extended beyond the model that was presented in that
chapter. Formal grammars do not encode any kind of processing strategy but simply
provide a declarative speciﬁcation of the well-formed sentences in a language.
Parsers are computer programs that use grammar rules to analyse sentences, and
this chapter introduces some fundamental approaches to syntactic parsing.
1.6.6 Appendices
The Appendices include:
A. A bibliography listing all works referenced in the subject guide, including
publication details and ISBNs.
B. A glossary of technical terms used in this subject guide.
C. Answers to selected activities.
D. A trace of a recursive descent parse as described in Chapter 6 of the subject guide.
E. A sample examination paper with guidelines on how to answer questions.
1.7 What the course does not cover
The ﬁeld of natural language processing or computational linguistics is a large and
diverse one, and includes many topics we will not be able to address in this course.
Some of these are listed below:
9